>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MARCH 27:
BERNIE SANDERS SWEEPS THE
WEEKEND'S DEMOCRATIC CAUCUSES IN
WASHINGTON STATE, ALASKA, AND
HAWAII.
ARE FIGHTERS FROM OTHER
COUNTRIES WHO JOIN ISIS IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA ACTUALLY CREATING
RIFTS IN THE EXTREMIST GROUP?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A
NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBE, THE
CHEROKEE NATION, AIMS TO
ERADICATE HEPATITIS C FROM ITS
POPULATION.
>> WE HAVE THIS POWERFUL
INTERVENTION NOW IN OUR HANDS
AND THIS EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY
OF WIPING OUT THIS DISEASE.
>> Thompson: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AFTER PRIMARIES AND CAUCUSES IN
33 STATES, CAMPAIGN 2016 IS
INCREASINGLY DEFINED BY TWO
WORDS: DELEGATE MATH.
IN THE MONTH AHEAD, ONLY A
HANDFUL OF BIG STATES REMAIN FOR
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES TO CLOSE
THE GAP WITH FRONTRUNNERS
HILLARY CLINTON AND DONALD
TRUMP.
NEXT UP IS WISCONSIN, WHICH
VOTES APRIL 5, FOLLOWED BY NEW
YORK, PENNSYLVANIA, AND
MARYLAND.
AFTER SWEEPING THREE DEMOCRATIC
CAUCUSES YESTERDAY, VERMONT
SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS TRAILS
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
CLINTON BY 700 DELEGATES NEEDED
TO WIN THE PARTY'S NOMINATION.
SANDERS EASILY WON WASHINGTON
STATE WITH 73% OF THE VOTE AND
NETTED AT LEAST 16 MORE
DELEGATES THAN CLINTON.
IN HAWAII, SANDERS RECEIVED 70%
OF THE VOTE AND NETTED NINE MORE
DELEGATES.
AND IN ALASKA, SANDERS WON 82
PERCENT OF THE VOTE AND NETTED
10 MORE DELEGATES.
>> AND I BELIEVE THAT OUR
CAMPAIGN IS THE CAMPAIGN OF
ENERGY, OF MOMENTUM, WHICH WILL
LEAD TO A LARGE VOTER TURNOUT IN
NOVEMBER AND VICTORY.
>> Thompson: THE DEMOCRATS HAVE
ALLOCATED 57% OF THEIR TOTAL
DELEGATES, AND THE REPUBLICANS,
65%.
DESPITE BEING A DISTANT THIRD IN
DELEGATES AMONG ACTIVE
CANDIDATES, OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN
KASICH SAID TODAY HE'S THE MOST
ELECTABLE REPUBLICAN.
>> I'M BEATING HILLARY BY 11
POINTS.
I'M THE ONLY ONE THAT CAN WIN IN
THE FALL.
AND AS YOU NOTICE, THE NARRATIVE
OVER THE LAST WEEK HAS BEEN,' ยก
WHAT IS WRONG WITH THE PARTY?'
KASICH'S THE GUY THAT CAN WIN
THE GENERAL.
>> Thompson: DONALD TRUMP, WHO'S
WON 12 MORE STATES AND 275 MORE
DELEGATES THAN TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ, TOLD ABC NEWS TODAY
WHOEVER HAS THE MOST VOTES AND
DELEGATES AFTER THE PRIMARIES
SHOULD BE THE PARTY'S NOMINEE.
IN BELGIUM TODAY, POLICE CARRIED
OUT MORE THAN A DOZEN RAIDS IN
BRUSSELS AND OTHER CITIES AND
DETAINED AT LEAST FOUR MORE
SUSPECTS, IN CONNECTION TO
TUESDAY'S TERRORIST ATTACKS THAT
KILLED 28 PEOPLE AND INJURED
HUNDREDS AT THE BRUSSELS AIRPORT
AND A SUBWAY STATION.
POLICE IN ITALY ARRESTED AN
ALGERIAN MAN SUSPECTED OF
FORGING I.D.'S FOR SUSPECTS IN
THE BRUSSELS ATTACKS AND THE
TERRORIST ATTACKS IN PARIS LAST
NOVEMBER, HE'LL BE EXTRADITED TO
BELGIUM.
BELGIAN PROSECUTORS TODAY
CHARGED A FOURTH SUSPECT
PREVIOUSLY IN CUSTODY.
THE SUSPECT WAS SHOT AT A TRAM
STOP THURSDAY.
LIKE THE OTHER THREE MEN
CHARGED, HE'S ACCUSED OF
PARTICIPATION IN A TERRORIST
GROUP, ISIS, THE GROUP BEHIND
THE BRUSSELS AND PARIS ATTACKS.
ABOUT 500 DEMONSTRATORS STAGING
AN ANTI-ISIS MARCH IN BRUSSELS
TODAY CLASHED WITH POLICE, WHO
USED A WATER CANNON TO DISPERSE
THEM.
THE MARCHERS HAD IGNORED CALLS
TO POSTPONE A SOLIDARITY MARCH.
AT THE CITY'S MAIN CATHEDRAL,
THE ARCHBISHOP TOLD PARISHIONERS
IN HIS EASTER SERMON THAT THE
ATTACKS, "UNDERMINED THE
FOUNDATIONS OF OUR SOCIETY."
AT THE VATICAN THIS EASTER
SUNDAY, POPE FRANCIS DENOUNCED
WHAT HE CALLED "BLIND AND
BRUTAL" TERRORISM IN BELGIUM, AS
WELL AS IN FRANCE, TURKEY, IVORY
COAST, IRAQ, AND OTHER
COUNTRIES.
IN HIS TRADITIONAL MESSAGE FROM
THE BALCONY OF ST. PETER'S
BASILICA THE POPE ALSO URGED
EUROPE NOT TO FORGET THE PLIGHT
OF REFUGEES FLEEING WAR AND
INJUSTICE, AND SEEKING A BETTER
FUTURE.
ISIS HAS SUFFERED A BIG SETBACK
IN SYRIA.
BACKED BY RUSSIAN AIR
STRIKES, SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
SOLDIERS HAVE DRIVEN ISIS
FIGHTERS OUT OF PALMYRA, A CITY
ISIS OCCUPIED FOR TEN-MONTHS,
DESTROYING TREASURED MONUMENTS
FROM ROMAN TIMES.
THE ARMY IS EXPECTED TO USE
PALMYRA AS A BASE TO MOUNT AN
OFFENSIVE ON THE ISIS'S DE FACTO
CAPITAL OF RAQQA, TO THE EAST.
A FACTION OF THE TALIBAN IS
CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY FOR A
SUICIDE BOMBING TONIGHT IN
PAKISTAN THAT KILLED AT LEAST 60
PEOPLE, AND SAYS CHRISTIANS WERE
THE TARGET.
OFFICIALS SAY THE SUICIDE BOMBER
STRUCK NEAR A PLAYGROUND CROWDED
WITH FAMILIES CELEBRATING EASTER
IN A PARK IN THE CITY OF LAHORE.
MOST OF THE VICTIMS ARE SAID TO
BE WOMEN AND CHILDREN, ALMOST
300 OTHER PEOPLE WERE INJURED.
CALIFORNIA'S STATE LEGISLATURE
IS POISED TO VOTE AS EARLY AS
THIS WEEK TO RAISE THE STATE'S
MINIMUM WAGE TO $15 AN HOUR."
THE LOS ANGELES TIMES" REPORTS
LEGISLATORS HAVE AGREED IN
PRINCIPLE TO RAISE THE WAGE FROM
THE CURRENT $10 AN HOUR TO 15-
AN-HOUR OVER THE NEXT SIX YEARS.
CALIFORNIA IS ALREADY ONE OF 11
STATES THAT REQUIRES A $10 AN
HOUR MINIMUM WAGE.
NEW YORK IS ALSO CONSIDERING A
HIKE TO 15.
A UNION-BACKED INITIATIVE TO
RAISE THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE TO
15 DOLLARS AN HOUR HAS ALREADY
QUALIFIED FOR THE CALIFORNIA
BALLOT IN NOVEMBER.
LEARN HOW SOME STATES ARE
RETHINKING GUARANTEED, MINIMUM
WAGES FOR TIPPED WORKERS.
WATCH OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
THE U.S. DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATES THE
NUMBER OF MEN WHO'VE TRAVELED
FROM THEIR HOME COUNTRIES TO
SYRIA AND IRAQ TO TAKE UP ARMS
WITH THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP,
ISIS, NOW EXCEEDS 36,000.
THESE SO-CALLED FOREIGN FIGHTERS
HAIL FROM MORE THAN 80
COUNTRIES, AND ACCORDING TO THE
SOUFAN GROUP, THE NUMBER FROM
WESTERN EUROPEAN NATIONS HAS
DOUBLED SINCE JUNE 2014.
TWO BRUSSELS BOMBERS ARE
BELIEVED TO HAVE TRAINED WITH
ISIS IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
BUT IS THE INFLUX OF FOREIGN
FIGHTERS CAUSING IDEOLOGICAL
DISCORD IN ISIS?"
WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
MATT BRADLEY HAS BEEN REPORTING
ON THAT, AND HE JOINS ME BY
SKYPE FROM BEIRUT.
NK
THE MOST PEOPLE HAVE ASSUMED
THAT THE FOREIGN FIGHTERS HAVE
BEEN WELCOMED WITH OPEN ARM BY
ISIS BUT YOU HAVE WRITTEN THAT'S
NOT NECESSARILY THE CASE, WHAT
IS GOING ON?
>> WELL, IT IS AND IT ISN'T.
THE FOREIGN FIGHTER ARE WELCOME
BECAUSE ISLAMIC STATE WANTS TO
BE ABLE TO PROJECT AN IMAGE OF
GLOBALLY APPEALING ISLAMIC
IDEAL.
BUT IT'S NOT QUITE THAT SIMPLE.
THERE IS OF COURSE QUITE A LOT
OF DISCORD AND WHAT IS SPARKING
THE DISCORD BETWEEN FOREIGN
FIGHTER AND LOCAL FIGHTERS ARE
THE PROBLEM WITH MONEY AND THE
PROBLEMS WITH BATTLEFIELD
DEFEATS THAT'S INCREASINGLY A
PROBLEM FOR ISLAMIC STATE IN
THEIR SELF-DECLARED.
>> Thompson: TALK MORE ABOUT
THAT WHAT ALL THESE CONFLICTS
ARE THAT ARE HAPPENING.
>> WHEN YOU HAVE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS WHO ARE REWARDED FOR
THEIR TRIP, FOR THEIR SACRIFICE,
COMING TO THE CALIPHATE WITH
WITH MORE MONEY MORE SPOILS
OFFICER WAR THERE IS BOUND TO BE
RESENTMENT FROM THE LOCAL FIGHT
ARE.
THESE ARE LOCAL FIGHTERS FOR THE
MO PART LIVING UNDER ISLAMIC
STATE RULE.
SO THEY HAVE LESS OF A CHOICE.
SO, THERE'S GOING TO BE SOME
DISCORD, THIS IS ESPECIALLY
ACUTE WHEN THERE'S BATTLEFIELD
DEFEATS.
SO, WHEN THEY LOSE SOMETHING
LIKE AS WE'RE SEEING RIGHT NOW,
CITY OF PALMYRA THEY DON'T HAVE
THE VOCABULARY TO ACCOMMODATE A
DEFEAT.
THIS IS THE GROUP THAT
CONSTANTLY TELLS ITS FOLLOWERS
THAT THEY ARE WORKING WITH THE
WRIT OF GOD WHEN THEIR DEFEATED
THEY HAVE TO FIND ANOTHER WAY OF
EXPLAINING THAT.
SOME SOMETIMES THAT MEANS
EXECUTING PEOPLE WITHIN THEIR
OWN RANKS.
FOR THE MOST PART THAT MEANS
EXECUTING SOME OF THE LOCAL
FIGHTERS NOT THE FOREIGNERS.
AND THIS PROJECTS THIS IMAGE OF
A FOREIGN OCCUPYING FORCE.
>> Thompson: DO YOU THINK
THESE INTERNAL CONFLICTS HAVE
THE POTENTIAL TO FRACTURE ISIS?
>> MOST OF THE PEOPLE THAT I'VE
TALKED TO, EVEN THOSE WHO LIVE
UNDER ISLAMIC STATE RULE, THEY
SAY THAT THIS IS GOING TO BE
MORE OF A SYMPTOM OF THE DECLINE
OF ISLAMIC STATE RATHER THAN A
CAUSE.
I MEAN, IT IS VERY TEMPTING TO
SAY THAT ISLAMIC STATE IS BEING
TORN FROM WITHIN, BECAUSE OF
THIS FRACTURE, BECAUSE OF THESE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FOREIGN
FIGHTERS AND LOCAL FIGHTERS.
THAT'S NOT REALLY THE CASE.
WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT REALLY
IS ATTENTION THAT IS EXISTED
WITHIN THE GROUP THAT'S BECOMING
MORE AND MORE ACUTE AS THEY LOSE
TERRITORY, AS THEY LOSE FUNDING.
BUT WE CAN'T REALLY TALK ABOUT
THE DEMISE OF THE GROUP YET, WE
DON'T KNOW.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION
ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON WITHIN
ISLAMIC STATE AND PARTICULARLY
WITHIN ISLAMIC STATE WITHIN THE
BORDERS OF THE CALIPHATE IN
SYRIA AND IRAQ.
>> Thompson: MATT BRADLEY OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> Thompson: A NATIVE AMERICAN
INDIAN TRIBE, THE CHEROKEE
NATION, IS THE FIRST COMMUNITY
IN THE UNITED STATES, AND ONE OF
ONLY A HANDFUL IN THE WORLD, TO
SET A GOAL OF COMPLETELY
ELIMINATING HEPATITIS C FROM ITS
POPULATION.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS.
IF THE CHEROKEE PROGRAM IS
SUCCESSFUL, IT COULD BECOME A
MODEL.
>> Reporter: GAYE WHEELER IS 61
YEARS OLD AND LIVES ON THIS
QUIET STREET IN THE TOWN OF FORT
GIBSON, OKLAHOMA.
SHE'S A MEMBER OF THE CHEROKEE
NATION, A FEDERALLY-RECOGNIZED
INDIAN TRIBE WITH 320,000
MEMBERS.
WHEELER WORKS AS A SUBSTANCE
ABUSE COUNSELOR, HELPING MEN AND
WOMEN WHO STRUGGLE WITH
ADDICTIONS TO DRUGS AND ALCOHOL.
IT'S A STRUGGLE SHE KNOWS WELL;
SHE STARTED DRINKING AT AGE 14.
>> THEN I GRADUATED FROM HIGH
SCHOOL AND MOVED TO TULSA.
AND THAT'S WHEN I STARTED THE
INTRAVENOUS DRUG USE AT THE AGE
OF 18.
I STARTED OFF WITH CRYSTAL METH.
THAT WAS THE BIG THING THEN.
AND THEN I DID COCAINE.
AND MAINLY I DID SPEEDBALLS,
HEROIN AND COCAINE.
>> Reporter: IN THE 1990S,
WHEELER WENT TO PRISON TWICE FOR
DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES.
>> WHEN I CAME OUT THE LAST
TIME, I DECIDED, YOU KNOW, I HAD
TO DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
>> Reporter: SHE STOPPED USING
DRUGS, WENT TO RECOVERY
MEETINGS, REGULARLY ATTENDED
CHURCH, AND STAYED SOBER.
THEN LAST YEAR, AFTER A ROUTINE
PHYSICAL, SHE FOUND OUT SHE HAD
HEPATITIS C.
AND SO DID A LOT OF HER FRIENDS.
>> EVERYBODY I KNEW, EVERYBODY I
RAN WITH, EVERYBODY I USED WITH.
>> Reporter: HEPATITIS C IS A
VIRUS THAT AFFECTS THE LIVER AND
CAN LEAD TO LIVER FAILURE,
CANCER, AND EVEN DEATH.
BUT HALF OF AMERICANS WHO HAVE
HEP C DON'T EVEN KNOW IT, IN
PART BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
SCREENED OR DIAGNOSED.
>> IT'S A SILENT EPIDEMIC IN
MANY WAYS.
>> Reporter: DOCTOR JORGE MERA
IS THE DIRECTOR OF INFECTIOUS
DISEASES FOR THE CHEROKEE
NATION.
>> SO HEPATITIS C IS A VIRUS
THAT THE MAIN FORM OF
TRANSMISSION IS INTRAVENOUS DRUG
USE.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
IT DOESN'T PRODUCE SYMPTOMS FOR
MANY YEARS AND EVEN WHEN IT
DOES, UNLESS THE PROVIDERS ARE
VERY FAMILIAR WITH HEPATITIS C,
THEY TEND TO BLAME THE SYMPTOMS
ON SOMETHING ELSE.
>> Reporter: HEPATITIS C IS A
GROWING HEALTH CRISIS IN THE
UNITED STATES, NOW AFFECTING 3.5
MILLION AMERICANS.
THE PROBLEM IS PARTICULARLY
ACUTE FOR NATIVE AMERICANS AND
THE CHEROKEE NATION, WHERE HEP C
INFECTION RATES ARE NEARLY FIVE
TIMES THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
NATIVE AMERICANS ARE TWICE AS
LIKELY TO DIE FROM HEPATITIS C
THAN OTHER AMERICANS.
THAT'S PART OF THE REASON THE
CHEROKEE NATION HAS MADE
ELIMINATING HEP C ONE OF ITS TOP
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIORITIES.
ALARMED BY THE DISEASE, CHEROKEE
OFFICIALS IN 2012 BEGAN WORKING
WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA,
THE OKLAHOMA STATE HEALTH
DEPARTMENT, AND EVENTUALLY
FEDERAL HEALTH OFFICIALS TO
DESIGN A HEP C ELIMINATION
PROGRAM THAT LAUNCHED LATE LAST
YEAR.
BILL JOHN BAKER IS PRINCIPAL
CHIEF OF THE CHEROKEE NATION.
>> HEP C HAS BEEN ALMOST LIKE
THE BIG C WORD OF WHEN YOU FOUND
OUT YOU HAD IT, IT WAS A DEATH
SENTENCE.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO THE
HEALTH IMPACT, BAKER SAYS THE
DISEASE TAKES AN ECONOMIC TOLL.
>> MOST FOLKS CAN'T WORK.
THEY CAN'T FUNCTION AS THE
DISEASE PROGRESSES.
IT'S A TREMENDOUS FINANCIAL
BURDEN.
>> Reporter: THE CHEROKEE HEALTH
SYSTEM SERVES 130,000 NATIVE
AMERICANS IN NORTHEASTERN
OKLAHOMA AT ITS MAIN HOSPITAL
AND AT EIGHT OUTREACH CLINICS.
LIKE MANY INDIAN HEALTH SYSTEMS,
CARE IS FREE FOR TRIBAL MEMBERS.
DOCTOR MERA SAYS THAT MAKES IT
EASIER TO SCREEN NEARLY
EVERYONE, A CORNERSTONE OF THE
HEP C ELIMINATION PROJECT.
>> MOST OF OUR PATIENTS WILL
COME IN THROUGH THE SYSTEM AT
SOME POINT.
WE WILL BE ABLE TO SCREEN THEM,
AND ONCE WE SCREEN THEM AND
DETECT THAT THEY'RE POSITIVE,
ENGAGE THEM IN CARE AND
HOPEFULLY TREAT THEM AND CURE
THEM.
>> JUST IMAGINE A SKEPTIC
WATCHING THIS STORY, MAYBE
THINKS, YOU KNOW, WHY SHOULD THE
CHEROKEE NATION BE SPENDING ITS
RESOURCES ON TRYING TO FIGHT THE
DISEASE WHEN THEY SHOULD REALLY
BE GOING AFTER DRUG USE?
>> PART OF OUR HEPATITIS C
PROGRAM IS TO EVALUATE THE NEED
AND VISIBILITY OF STARTING
OPIATE SUBSTITUTION CLINICS
WHICH IS -- IT TACKLES THE -- IT
DIMINISHES I.V. DRUG USE.
DEFINITELY PREVENTION IS THE
ANSWER, THE LONG-TERM ANSWER.
RIGHT NOW, WE HAVE TO PUT THE
FIRE OUT BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE INFECTED.
AND THOSE PEOPLE WILL DEVELOP
LIVER -- END-STAGE LIVER DISEASE
IF WE DON'T TREAT THEM TODAY.
>> Reporter: THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
HELPED DESIGN THE CHEROKEE HEP C
PROGRAM, WHICH INCLUDES
SCREENING AND TREATMENT, AS WELL
AS PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS
AND A PROGRAM TO TRAIN
HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS TO TREAT
THE DISEASE.
DOCTOR JOHN WARD DIRECTS THE
CDC'S VIRAL HEPATITIS DIVISION.
HE SAYS IT'S NOT ENTIRELY CLEAR
WHY NATIVE AMERICANS ARE MORE
LIKELY TO DIE FROM HEP C.
>> SOME OF IT COULD BE UNDER-
RECOGNITION WHICH IS A PROBLEM
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY.
THEY ALSO HAVE OTHER CO-FACTORS
THAT WHEN BROUGHT TOGETHER WITH
HEPATITIS C ACCELERATE THE
PROGRESSION OF THEIR LIVER
DISEASE, AND THOSE OTHER
CONDITIONS INCLUDE ALCOHOL USE
AND OBESITY.
>> Reporter: THE CDC RECOMMENDS
HEP C SCREENINGS FOR ALL BABY
BOOMERS -- EVERYONE BORN BETWEEN
1945 AND 1965-- NOW AGED 50 TO
70.
BUT DOCTOR MERA DISCOVERED HALF
OF HIS HEPATITIS C PATIENTS ARE
YOUNGER THAN 50.
SO NOW, UNDER THE TRIBE'S HEP C
ELIMINATION PROGRAM, ANYONE OVER
AGE 20 WHO COMES THROUGH THE
CHEROKEE HEALTH SYSTEM, FOR ANY
REASON, IS SCREENED FOR HEP C,
REGARDLESS OF OTHER RISK
FACTORS.
>> WE'RE DOING AGE TARGETED
SCREENING.
WE'RE NOT DOING SCREENING BASED
ON RISK FACTORS, FIRST BECAUSE
WE KNOW IT DOESN'T WORK WELL.
MANY PROVIDERS WILL NOT ASK RISK
FACTORS WITH PATIENTS.
THEY DON'T HAVE THE TIME TO DO
IT OR IT IS A SENSITIVE ISSUE.
>> Reporter: WHEN GAYE WHEELER
WAS DIAGNOSED AS PART OF THE HEP
C ELIMINATION PROGRAM, SHE TOLD
A NURSE SHE WAS WORRIED ABOUT
THE TREATMENT.
FRIENDS -- AND A CLOSE MALE
RELATIVE -- HAD EXPERIENCED
DEBILITATING SIDE EFFECTS LIKE
FATIGUE AND DEPRESSION.
>> I SAID, WHAT MEDICATION AM I
GOING TO HAVE TO TAKE?
AND SHE SAID WELL THERE'S NEW
MEDICATIONS.
AND I WAS LIKE, OKAY.
BUT YOU KNOW IN MY OWN MIND
AFTER I HUNG UP, I THOUGHT, WOW,
IS THIS GOING TO BE LIKE WHAT HE
HAD TO GO THROUGH?
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO
THOSE SIDE EFFECTS, THE MAIN
DRUGS USED TO TREAT HEP C UNTIL
A FEW YEARS AGO, INTERFERON AND
RIBAVIRIN, CURED HEP C ONLY
ABOUT HALF THE TIME.
AND MANY PATIENTS HAD OTHER
MEDICAL CONDITIONS THAT
PREVENTED THEM FROM TAKING THOSE
DRUGS.
>> WHEN I WAS TREATING PATIENTS
IN THE INTERFERON ERA, I COULD
TREAT 10% OF THE PATIENTS,
ROUGHLY 10% OF THE PATIENTS THAT
CAME TO MY OFFICE WITH HEPATITIS
C.
BEST CASE SCENARIO I COULD CURE,
50%.
BEST CASE SCENARIO.
>> Reporter: IN 2014, THE FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION APPROVED
A NEW CLASS OF MEDICATIONS TO
TREAT HEP C.
THESE DRUGS ARE TAKEN ORALLY,
ONCE A DAY, HAVE FEW SIDE
EFFECTS AND A 90% CURE RATE.
>> WE HAVE THIS POWERFUL
INTERVENTION NOW IN OUR HANDS
AND OUR CHALLENGE AS A NATION IS
TO BRING TOGETHER THE
POPULATIONS WHO CAN BENEFIT FROM
THESE TREATMENTS TOGETHER WITH
THOSE TREATMENTS AND REALLY HAVE
AN EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY OF
WIPING OUT THIS DISEASE.
>> Reporter: BUT THE DRUGS ARE
VERY EXPENSIVE.
GAYE WHEELER TOOK A MEDICATION
CALLED HARVONI ITS
MANUFACTURER, GILEAD SCIENCES,
CHARGES $63,000-$94,000 FOR AN
EIGHT TO 12 WEEK TREATMENT
COURSE.
WHEELER'S MEDICATION CAME AT NO
COST TO HER.
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES OFFER
SUBSTANTIAL DISCOUNTS TO
CHEROKEE PATIENTS, AND THE TRIBE
USES MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
DOLLARS TO COVER REMAINING
COSTS.
BUT EVEN WITH DISCOUNTS, A
BIPARTISAN SENATE FINANCE
COMMITTEE REPORT LAST YEAR SAID
GILEAD'S DRUG PRICES WERE
PUTTING "A LARGE BURDEN" ON
MEDICARE, MEDICAID AND OTHER
GOVERNMENT HEALTH PROGRAMS.
IN A STATEMENT TO THE NEWSHOUR,
GILEAD SAID THE PRICE OF HARVONI
REFLECTS THE COST OF
"INNOVATION," AND THAT HARVONI
AND OTHER THERAPIES "OFFER A
CURE AT A PRICE THAT
SIGNIFICANTLY REDUCES HEPATITIS
C TREATMENT COSTS."
THE COMPANY ALSO SAID IT OFFERS
"DEEP GOVERNMENT DISCOUNTS TO
ELIGIBLE HEALTH PROGRAMS."
GILEAD HAS DONATED $1.5 MILLION
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA
FOR ITS PART IN ASSISTING THE
CHEROKEE HEP C ELIMINATION
PROGRAM.
DOCTOR MERA SAYS WITH COMPETING
HEP C DRUGS IN THE PIPELINE FROM
OTHER PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES,
HE EXPECTS MEDICATION COSTS TO
COME DOWN.
>> DO YOU WORRY AT ALL THAT SOME
OF THE CONCLUSIONS YOU'LL REACH
HERE, AREN'T GONNA BE APPLICABLE
OUTSIDE OF CHEROKEE NATION
BECAUSE MOST PEOPLE DON'T HAVE
THE KIND OF MEDICAL COVERAGE
THAT PEOPLE HERE IN CHEROKEE
NATION DO?
>> WE WON'T BE ABLE TO
EXTRAPOLATE WHAT WE DO OR FIND
TO EVERY MEDICAL SCENARIO IN THE
UNITED STATES.
BUT I THINK EVERYBODY WILL LEARN
A LITTLE BIT FROM SOME OF THE
THINGS WE DID.
LIKE, FOR EXAMPLE, WE EXPANDED
AGE TARGETED SCREENING TO-- FROM
20 TO 69.
THE RECOMMENDATIONS RIGHT NOW
ARE ONLY BABY BOOMERS IN THE
U.S.
>> Reporter: JOHN WARD FROM THE
CDC SAYS THE CHEROKEE PROGRAM
COULD BECOME A NATIONAL MODEL
FOR ELIMINATING HEP C.
>> WELL, THE NUMBER ONE LESSON
WE CAN LEARN FROM THE CHEROKEE
NATION IS THE POWER OF POLITICAL
COMMITMENT TO TACKLING THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: SO FAR, THE
CHEROKEE PROGRAM HAS TREATED
ALMOST 300 HEP C PATIENTS, AND
OF THOSE WHO'VE COMPLETED
TREATMENT AND FINISHED
EVALUATION, 96% ARE DISEASE-
FREE, INCLUDING GAYE WHEELER.
>> Thompson: THE STATE
GOVERNMENT IN UTAH HAS BECOME
THE FIRST IN THE NATION TO
PUBLISH ONLINE, A LIST OF PEOPLE
CONVICTED OF WHITE COLLAR
CRIMES.
COMPLETE WITH THEIR MUG SHOTS.
ANYONE WHO'S COMMITTED A
FINANCIAL CRIME WILL BE POSTED
FOR A DECADE.
REPORTER JEAN EAGLESHAM IS
COVERING THIS ISSUE FOR THE"
WALL STREET JOURNAL," AND SHE
JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS IT.
FIRST, TELL ME, WHY DID YOU
DECIDE TO IMPLEMENT THIS?
>> TWO REASONS, FIRST STAY IT
WILL HELP PROTECT INVESTORS
BECAUSE PEOPLE CAN SEE ONLINE
PEOPLE WITH PAST CONVICTION.
THE SECOND REASON WE'RE TRYING
TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO PAY
RESTITUTION, SO ANYONE WHO IS
CONVICTED OF CRIME WHO HAS PAID
FULL RESTITUTION ONLINE CAN SAY
OFF THE REGISTRY.
>> Thompson: TALK ABOUT THE
MECHANICS.
WHERE WILL THIS BE?
>> WHAT THEY DO NOW GOING ALL
THE WAY BACK TO 2006 FINDING
EVERYONE WITH RELEVANT
CONVICTION, PUTTING THEM
INFORMATION ON THE WEBSITE.
IT SHOWS THE INDIVIDUALS, THE
MUG SHOT, ALSO THEIR PERSONAL
DETAILS LIKE HEIGHT OR WEIGHT.
AND DETAILS OF THEIR CONVICTION.
ANYONE WITH ACCESS TO THE
INTERNET CAN SEARCH AND LOOK
THEIR NEIGHBORS OR WORK
COLLEAGUES OR ANYONE THEY KNOW
HAVE THE PAST CONVICTION.
>> Thompson: WHAT KIND OF
CRIMES?
>> TREVOR PEOPLE WHO HAVE BILKED
INVESTORS LARGE AMOUNTS OF MONEY
ALSO PEOPLE WHO CONVICTED SAY
CREDIT CARD FRAUD, WHO STOLE
FROM THEIR EMPLOYER OR THEIR
FRIENDS.
TAX FRAUD, THERE'S INSURANCE
SCAMS AS WELL.
PRETTY LARGE SCALE.
VERY WIDE RANGE OF FINANCIAL
CRIMES.
>> Thompson: WHEN MOST PEOPLE
THINK ABOUT THESE TYPES OF
REGISTRIES, THEY THINK OF A
REGISTRY FOR SEX OFFENDERS, BUT
YOU'VE WRITTEN THAT THERE ARE
ACTUALLY LOT OF STATES WITH A
LOT OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF
REGISTRIES.
>> EXACTLY.
A REGISTRY FOR SEX OFFENDERS AND
PROLIFERATED TO VERY WIDE RANGE
OF DIFFERENT OFFENSES.
S, FOR EXAMPLE, IN DIFFERENT
STATES, THERE ARE REGISTRIES FOR
ARSON, FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE,
FOR DRUG CRIMES OF DIFFERENT
TYPES.
EVEN ABUSE.
TENNESSEE HAS REGISTERS OF
ANIMAL ABUSE, AND NINE OTHER
STATES ARE CONSIDERING IT.
OUR ONE CONCERN WHETHER THIS
COULD HAVE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES.
FOR EXAMPLE, CREATING A REGISTRY
THAT SHOWS PEOPLE COMMITTED
MANUFACTURING DRUGS, COULD
POTENTIALLY BE USED BY USERS WHO
ARE LOOKING FOR SOMEONE AS A
SUPPLIER.
>> Thompson: ANY EVIDENCE
THAT THESE REGISTRIES ACTUALLY
DETER CRIME?
>> THAT'S THE QUESTION, ARE THEY
EFFECTIVE, THESE OTHER TYPES OF
OFFENSES, A DEBATE FOR SEX
OFFENDER REGISTRIES WHERE THEY
ACTUALLY WORK.
BUT THESE OTHER ONES, RELATIVELY
RECENT, NOT MUCH RESEARCH INTO
WHETHER THEY ACTUALLY ARE
EFFECTIVE.
THEN THERE'S THE WIDE ARGUMENT
OF THE PRIVACY, BECAUSE APPROACH
THE STATES WITH THE WHITE COLLAR
CRIMES, DIRECTLY OPPOSITE TO THE
APPROACH FEDERAL AGENCIES.
SO THEY SAY BECAUSE FEDERAL
PRIVACY LAWS, THEY CAN'T GIVE
OUT INFORMATION ON WHAT
INDIVIDUALS ARE PAID FACTIONS OR
NOT.
>> Thompson: IS THERE DEBATE
WHAT COULD BE CONSIDERED PUBLIC
SHAMING?
I MEAN A PERSON HAS DONE THEIR
JAIL TIME, THEY HAVE PAID THEIR
FINES, IS THERE LIMIT TO HOW
LONG THIS PUNISHMENT MIGHT GO ON
>> WITH UTAH YOU ARE ON THERE
FOR A LIFETIME THERE.
IS EXACTLY THIS DEBATE CONCERN
THAT PEOPLE HAVE -- THEY SERVE
THEIR PUNISHMENT, MAYBE DONE THE
JAIL TIME, THEY PAID THE
RESTITUTION, BUT POSSIBLY LATE.
YET THEY ARE BEING PUNISHED ALL
OVER AGAIN BY THE PUBLIC
SHAMING.
THIS IS A CONCERN THAT IT IS
UNFAIR IN THAT SENSE.
>> Thompson: JEAN EAGLESHAM
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
>> Thompson: AND NOW AN UPDATE
TO A RECENT SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
IN JANUARY, WE REPORTED ON THE
INCREASING NUMBER OF PREGNANT
WOMEN STRUGGLING WITH ADDICTION
TO OPIOIDS, PRESCRIPTION
PAINKILLERS LIKE OXYCODONE,
VICODIN, AND PERCOCET, AND
HEROIN.
AS A RESULT, THE NUMBER OF
BABIES BORN WITHDRAWING FROM
THOSE DRUGS, HAS SOARED.
THE RATE IS THREE TIMES THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE IN TENNESSEE,
WHICH HAS THE SECOND-HIGHEST
RATE OF OPIOID PRESCRIBING IN
THE U.S.
IN RESPONSE, TWO YEARS AGO,
TENNESSEE BECAME THE FIRST STATE
TO EMPOWER PROSECUTORS TO CHARGE
MOTHERS WITH FETAL ASSAULT FOR
USING OPIOIDS WHILE PREGNANT.
SPONSORS SAID IT WAS NOT
INTENDED TO PUNISH WOMEN BUT TO
GET THEM TREATMENT AND PROTECT
THEIR BABIES.
THIS PAST WEEK, TENNESSEE
LEGISLATORS VOTED TO DISCONTINUE
THE LAW, BECAUSE IT WAS FOUND
NOT TO HELP WOMEN AND HAD
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES.
DOCTORS TESTIFIED THE THREAT OF
ARREST KEPT MANY ADDICTED
PREGNANT WOMEN FROM SEEKING
TREATMENT AND PRENATAL CARE.
CRITICS ALSO SAID THE LAW DROVE
SOME ADDICTS TO GET ABORTIONS.
IN A RELATED MOVE, THE FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED
LAST WEEK IT WILL ISSUE WARNING
LABELS FOR 175 PRESCRIPTION
PAINKILLERS, SAYING THEY SHOULD
BE TAKEN ONLY AFTER OTHER
MEDICATIONS AND PHYSICAL THERAPY
FAIL TO ALLEVIATE PAIN.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
HAS ALSO RELEASED ITS FIRST
PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR
OPIOIDS, SAYING DOCTORS SHOULD
OFFER THE DRUGS ONLY AFTER
CONSIDERING PHYSICAL THERAPY,
OVER-THE-COUNTER MEDICATION, AND
OTHER METHODS TO TREAT CHRONIC
PAIN.
OPIOID PAINKILLER ABUSE IS
LINKED TO 19,000 FATAL OVERDOSES
A YEAR IN THE U.S.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE OPIOID
EPIDEMIC'S TOLL ON PREGNANT
WOMEN AND THEIR BABIES.
WATCH OUR EARLIER REPORT ONLINE
AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Thompson: AND FINALLY, WRITER
JIM HARRISON HAS DIED AT HIS
HOME IN ARIZONA.
HE WROTE MORE THAN 30 BOOKS OF
FICTION, POETRY, AND ESSAYS, THE
BEST-KNOWN BEING THE 1979
COLLECTION "LEGENDS OF THE
FALL."
HE WAS A RUGGED OUTDOORSMAN
WHO SET MANY OF HIS WORKS IN THE
WEST AND RURAL MICHIGAN, WHERE
HE GREW UP.
HIS MOST RECENT NOVEL "THE
ANCIENT MINSTREL" WAS PUBLISHED
JUST THIS MONTH.
HE WAS 78.
THE "NEWSHOUR" JEFFREY BROWN
PROFILED HARRISON IN 2009 AND
YOU CAN WATCH THAT STORY ONLINE
AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
NEWSHOUR, I'M MEAGAN THOMPSON.
GOOD NIGHT.